Rachel Carson, English major/zoologist 🗓 1962
edited reports of field scientists, died of breast cancer.

"Obligation to endure gives us the right to know"
postwar culture of science claimed dominion over nature
ecology of human body; human health reflects environmental ills
1972 DDT banned in US, 2004 worldwide; Carson did not push for DDT ban.
2007 some one said "The ban on DDT may have killed 20 million children.""
Insecticides are really biocides
Nuclear annihilation along side environmental damage
chemicals accumulate all cells - inadvertent redesign of genes (the future)
overproduction; fed solution: reduce farm land to stimulate use of chemicals
Insects compete for food and transmit disease (limit humans)
US office of Plant Introduction imported 200,000 species and related insects
Persons using chemicals do not know their potential of harm
People exposed to chemicals without their consent
Insects used to test chemical weapons - insecticides came after
We eat drink and make chemical part of our body
Arsenic in soot known as carcinogen 200 years ago but used as insecticide;
from insecticides, mining slag, and natural rocks.
Person that found DDT to be an insecticide (for malaria) won nobel prise
DDT dusted soldier refuges and prisoners to combat lice and hence typhus
DDT in hay 7/mil, milk 3/mil, butter 65/mil, passes placenta
Chlordane banned in 1988 - found in houses 32 years after termite treatment
Dieldrin found in arctic, use for malaria when DDT became less effective
Aldrin (for termites) in soil converts to dieldrin (for fruit soil and seed)
Endrin exterminated roaches, house cleaned, dog died, and baby became vegetable
Plastic bag that contained Parathion, organic phosphate, killed two kids
Organic phosphates secretly developed for warfare then used as insecticides
they destroy nerve enzymes - resemble poison in mushrooms; are weeks lived
Parathion in California farms lethal for 10 times the world population
Malathion, removed by liver: used for lice, home gardens, west nile virus
Use malathion, after a week another phosphate: increases potency 50 times.
The liver's enzyme to neutralize malathion is blocked.
Exposed to malathion increases toxicity of muscle relaxants and barbiturates.
Systemic insecticide, flea bites dog and dies because blood is poisonous.
Selenium or organic phosphorus. Treat cotton seeds - workers got sick.
Herbicides are not safe as well
Petra(chrorophenol; PCP) treat utility poles and railroad ties
Aminotriazole kills weeds in non-farms, banned in Europe in 2009

Polluted water in Colorado traveled  3 miles for 8 years to farm wells
New pollutants may form in holding tanks; non-pollutant may become pollutants
Clear lake California treated with DDT for gnat control', for recreation;
water no DDT, plankton 5/mil small fish 100/mil large fish 2500/mil

Life, bacteria-fungus-algae, lichens first, create/recycle soil.
"Pound of DDT is harmless" , but have 15 to 35!
Permanent Arsenic soil poisoning; in tobacco increased up to 600%
carrots collect more insecticide than any other crop
low organic soil releases more insecticides
Hexachlorobenzene, C6Cl6, carcinogen, seed fungicide, banned world wide;
peanuts pickup pollutant form previous year cotton
Heptachlor kill treated strawberries and remained in soil after 4 years

Sage in west high planes, tolerates frost, drought, winds
Sage eradication (for cattle) also killed willows
Size of new England in the west is sprayed - also select conifers from hardwoods
Weedkillers are cheaper than mowing and safer than insecticides(!)
Side of roads became ugly deserts; one said: Kill good plants if they are in bad
company; objecting is like saying stray dogs are more important than babies.
Killing weeds disrupt the pollination cycle of insects.
Can be selective, for example, keep shrubs and spray only trees
Control “Man has lost the capacity to foresee
and to forestall. He will end by
destroying the earth.”nematodes with marigolds
2,4-D possible carcinogen, kills broad leaf weeds and leaves grasses unaffected
instead of chlordane, use healthy grass to squeeze out crabgrass
1925 imported cactus, for insects to make dye, made land in Australia useless;
Argentine moths imported 1930 thinned out the cactus.

Buffalo, shorebirds, egret (for plumage) were nearly exterminated
Aldrin pelleted in Michigan to control Japanese beetle because it was cheapest;
state said that is harmless to humans and pets(!), but birds, squirrels died,
pets and people became sick.
3 lbs Dieldrin /acre  (50x DDT potent) for the Japanese beetle in Illinois
1955 birds, cats, squirrels, other animals died in anguish.
Spraying for malaria nearly wiped cats.
In east Japanese beetle control by imported wasp.
Used bacteria infected grubs ground with chalk  - effected 90%+ of beetles.
This not used in Michigan/Illinois because too expensive, but work
started to mass produce the bacteria of the milky disease.

1958 spaying elms with DDT, birds, protected by law, disappeared; SILENCE:
After fire ant treatment. drive for miles in Mississippi and see no birds.
Dutch Elm fungus imported in 1930, caused bird extinctions.
Michigan university in 1954 sprayed elm trees, next spring robins would die
DDT killed the bark beetle, but worms ate leaves, and robins ate worms..
Robin's and other birds' reproduction capacity decimated.
Swallows starved because of no insects.
Chickadees and other birds feed on insects eggs,on barks.
Trees get more insect damage because birds are not there.
"We become victims of our diabolical insect control"
Not "save the elm or the birds"" - save elms - burn all diseased elms.
Resistant strains developed in 1990's
Eagles, eating fish, poisoned with and could not reproduce,
DDT sprayed to kill slat marsh mosquitoes.
Seeds treated for fungus, but dieldrin, aldrin and heptachlor for soil insects.
In England foxes died from eating birds.
California ducks died when rice fields were seeded.
Growers found insecticide was dual purpose;  instead of changing practices..
Parthion sprayed to control insects and birds - other animals were colatarol.
"Who has decided or has right to decide to do this"

Miramichi in Canada spayed DDT for (native) spruce budworm (35 year cycle)
only 1/2 pound per acre, 2 days after fish started dying
Study happened to be active and found all salmon hatchlings wiped out.
DDT reduced to 1/4 pound per acre but continued in other places.
Luckily hurricane came and brought more flies and salmon... and stopped spray
Low dose DDT 3/mil instead of killing, blinded fish
Yellowstone 1/lb DDT /acre, killed fish
DDT stored in fat delayed death
Fire and control via heptachlor and dieldrin killed fish within few days
63 lb /scre of toxaphene killed fish right after rains.
Gold fish in cages would die after a day.
1961 Austin fish disaster, dumping kill all fish, 27 species, in 200 miles
40 -60 lb fish, a giant blue fish 84 lbs; some would never recover.
Florida dieldrin spay for sandfly killed 20-30 tons of fish, mollusks not killed
Spraying salt marshes (fish nurseries) killed crabs then birds
Shrimp larvae sensitive to 1/billion of of endrin

Spraying: "rain of death" from surplus WW2 planes and new organic insecticides
1869 european Gypsy moths, when crossing them with silk worms, escaped.
Gypsy moth DDT spray in 1956: million acre forrest and New york urban area(!)
Ornithologist tried to stop it, but courts refused.
Spray planes paid by gallon instead by acre; properties sprayed twice.
People could not out of state sprayers.  Gypsy moths not effected at all.

Fire ant, imported WWI, minor problem to farm machinery, but topic of movies.
No reported damage to crops or livestock. Agriculture Dept propaganda movies.
33 bee deaths no fire ant deaths in 1959.
2 lbs/acre of dieldrin and heptachlor equivalent to 120 lbs DDT.
Sole survivor was house sparrow. Turkeys, cows,... pets died.
Stabled animals not effected.
Obvious: treat the mounds that ants make; $0.23 instead of $3.50 + damage/ acre

Most people exposed to day by day life long exposure instead of spraying.
Household insecticides: chlordane, dieldrin, treated shelve paper
Lotions cream sprays. Lindane strips or vaporizers for moths.
USDA advice to spray clothes with DDT, dieldrin, chlordane for moths.
Ants sleep in mothproof blanket.
Parathion deaths before adopting regulation.
Warnings in small print were hardly noticed.
Crabgrass killer brandnames hide chlordane  or dieldrin.

Insecticide in food: 5 to 7 ppm of DDT in fat of all people.
In prison, dried fruit/bread 70/100 ppm DDT; meats have more
Eskimos had 2 ppm DDT from food during hospital surgery.
Every meal in USA has chlorinated hydrocarbons (Methyl chloride from algae)
Root cause: farmers frequently exceed recommended doses.
Spaying 8 different chemicals.  Spraying DDT one week before harvest.
Food warehouse treated with insecticides. Government cannot protect us:
(1) FDA limited to interstate commerce (2) small staff; <1% inspected
Tolerances: (1) based on single food animal studies (2) not best scientific
advice; heptaclor tolerances later revoked.
Unused seeds treated with fungicide may end up being used for food.
Fed allows poisons for profit, public taxed to adequately police poisons.
7/1/.1 ppm DDT/parathion/dieldrin tolerances should zero.
Poisoning and policing, from Alice in Wonderland,: "dye one's whiskers
green and use a large fan so they are not seen"
Substitues: pyrethrins (chrysanthemum), rotenone (jicama, eat raw),
ryania (Amazon vine) +synthetic adjuvants, bacteria

Solve smallpox, cholera, plague solved; chemical pollution started
Visual symptoms are impressive, accumulated poisoning not so.
Ecology: web of life/death.
Disease cause/effect is not easy; cannot detect injury before symptoms.
Obesity treatment resulted to poison symptoms because of dieldrin in fat.
Malathion and methoxychlor (2002 banned)less toxic because liver removes them.
Liver diseases have increased.
Nervous system effected; pricking/burning/itching/tremors/convulsions.
British researchers exposed themselves on DDT to study symptoms.
American experimented with volunteers.
Women, young, sedentary, indoors more susceptible.
Repeated exposure may trigger allergic reaction in some people.
Constant exposure may desensitize - similar to allergens.
On chemical may effect liver, so that another chemical is more toxic or stored.
Poison symptoms may return on using tranquilizers.
Lindane stored in brain, was used in medicines and treating lice(!)
1030's ginger liquor substitute with phosphate chemical: ginger paralysis.
Parathion use created similar nerve damage.
Exposure create mental disease; confusion, memory loss, mania.

Mitochondria supply cellular energy Adeno triphosphate (ATP)
ATP gives up a phosphate group to contracting muscle - like 'battery discharge'.
Locate in nerves found in junctions, in sperm in start of tail.
DDT methoxychlor, malathion, phenothiazine inhibit oxidation enzymes.
Disrupted oxidation cycle: cancer, congenital defects.
ATP depletion could be mechanism for eagle embryos dying.
Higher DDT concentration in testes - in pheasants 1,500ppm.
Genetic deterioration (dysgenics/eugenics); in war fit men die, weak stay home;
criminals in UK have more children. One child policy reduced dysgenics.
2002 air pollution causes heritable mutations in mice.
2014 Chinese babies had genetic defects in polluted areas.
Mutagens: radiation 1927, mustard gas 1940's
Mosquitoes exposed to DDT became part male part female.

1775 scrotal cancer in chimney sweepers. Shale and lignite workers got cancer.
Malignant growths in dead: 1900/1958: 4/15%; fpr children it is more.
Reichenstein Disease: cancers from arsenic in groundwater near gold/silver mines
Same problem in Cordoba Argentina - 2005 reports published
Aminotriazole herbicide 1959 contamination and stock copse, European ban 2009
Radium in watches, touching brushes created bone cancer 15 years later.
Leukemia from atomic blasts less that 3 years.  1950/1960: 16K/25K leukimias.
World rate in 3-4 years olds up; cell division is susceptible.
Dyscrasia: a blood, bone marrow, lymph disease.
Originally imbalance in: blood, black bile(kidney,spleen: depressed),
                   water, and yellow bile(liver: choler/irritated)
Warbug tumor theory: energy production via glycolysis (non-oxidative); oxygen
   respiration replaced with sugar fermentation.
Chromosome instability causes tumors - example in colon
Benzene C6H6: shave lotion, decaf, paint strip, make: nylon/drugs/explosives
Urethane, a carbonate, used as ..cider, drugs  clothing, insulation, reproductive
system cancers. Liver damaged, estrogen and tumors increase.
Yeast rich in B vitamins reduces cancers.
Malnutrition: bigger and cancerous male breasts.
Synthetic estrogens in: drugs(contraceptives), food, cosmetics.
Detergent maybe carcinogen primers.
1962: trout liver cancer epidemic.. We live in "sea of carcinogens".
Removed pump handle from pump to stop cholera.
Slow adoption of prevention because curing is more glamorous and rewarding.
Carcinogens from: (1) search of better life (2) carcinogens big part of economy
Cancer cure is fleeting, prevention (via clean food/water/air) is durable.

Insect control; (1) it is by nature not man (2) reproducing power in weak envir.
Control coyote, get mice plague.
Kill deer predators, deer starve. Similar with predator insects.
After spraying black flies increased 17 times.
Spider mite big pest (sucks chlorophyll) after DDT killed its enemies.
1956 DDT for spruce bud-worm -> spider mite explosion
1029, before DDT, used lead arsenate.
Corn borer increase after spraying dieldrin for Japanese beetle
Corn borer damage 8x more expensive.  24 parasites were tried to control.
1890: Vedalia beetle  from Australia saved citrus trees in California.
1940's: spraying vedalia reduced,  scale insect infestation returned.
Florida spaying: fish died, snail thrived and spread flukes;
causing liver disease - $3mil damage in cattle.
From chemical industry sponsorin, bias:
more chemical control entomological than biological control.
Economic entomologist: salvation at the end of the nozzle.

Spraying with lime sulfur created resistant insects.
Covering and fumigating trees with hydroc@yanic acid did the same.
But organic spraying is much much bigger than inorganic.
Disease specialists know about the resistance, agriculturists not.
1945/1960 12/137 species resistant to insecticides.
Resistance to bensenehexachloride came within a year of using it.
This like atomic bombs, "could be headline news if properly understood"
Via vectors: malaria, yellow fever, encephalitis, bacillus of dysentery, typhus,
             acute conjunctivitis, spotted fever, salmonellosis
body lice, plague, rat fleas, sleeping sickness, elephantiasis
DDT, chlordane mosquito resistance within 2 years.
Infant mortality reduction by 50% in Egypt, lost within a year.
1957: lice (typhus) resistance to DDT in most countries.
Anopheles sacharovi, in Greece 1949, first DDT resistant mosquito.
1956/1960 5/28 mosquito species were resistant.
""Guide natural process instead of brute force ... humility instead of conceit".

Biological control: sterile male mosquitoes more virulent than wild ones.
1954, Kipling eradicated screw worm flies in Curacon island.
3.5 billion radiation sterilized eggs eradicated the screw worm in Florida.
Chemical sterilants could be used but not sprayed.
Psychological warfare: female gypsy male attractant: gyplure.
Attractant and poison in fiberboard by air; eliminated 99% of fruit fly.
Sound attractants/repellents being tested.
Pasteur/germ theory via silkworm infections.
Inset infections: bacteria, virus, fungi, protozoa, microscopic worms.
1930 milky disease to control Japanese beetle.
Bacillus thuringiensis bacteria kill as  well as DDT.
Alfalfa sprayed with virus infected caterpillars.
Virus for pine sawflies replaced insecticides.
No insect pathogen has never infected a vertebrae
Insect/insect: 1888 Australia insects for cottony cushion scale
up tp 1962, imported 100 species of parasites or predators.
$4B in biological control saved $100B.
Biological control easier in forests than farmlands.
Germany set up bird boxes (from school kids), and 10,000 ant colonies;
set of predators is better than one.
The web spider cocoons protect young shoots and catch 200K insects.
Introduced shrews feeding on cocoons eliminated sawflies in Newfoundland.

Poisons use against delicate and resilient life capable of striking back.
Need high minded orientation and humility before life forces.
"Control of nature" assumes that nature exists for convenience of man.
Entomology, armed with terrible weapons, in turned them on insects, has turned
them against the earth.

Plan to create Panama canal with nuclear explosives, stopped.
Plan to eradicate fire ants half executed without success and collateral damage
River public water had more cancer that public wells.
“Man has lost the capacity to foresee
and to forestall. He will end by
destroying the earth.”
