Thomas S. Khun  Berkeley, MIT physicist/science philosopher 🗓 1962


A critic's review: Khun is anti-positivist;
  Science does not behave according to:
    1. pure empiricism
       (value creeps in)
    2. logical analysis
       (dis-confirmation does not change people's mind )

Science: Knowledge from study of structure/behaviour of the physical world, by
         watching, measuring, and experimenting, and developing theories.
         Facts, theories, and methods in textbooks.

Paradigms that defined research problems and methods:
    1. Aristotle's Physica (~350 BC): (nature) cause/chance, motion, void, time
    2. Ptolemy's Almagest (~150): (al magisti; the greatest, arabic/greek)
                            astronomy, geography, mathematics
    3. Newton's Principia (1687): Motion of bodies, system of the world
                Optiks (1704): geometrical. white = sum of colors
    4. Franklin's Experiments and Observations on Electricity (no theories)
    5. Lavoisier's Chemistry (1789): combustion, oxygen, sulphur, nitric acid
    6. Lyell's Geology (1830): Mount Etna study; studied by Darwin
    7. Darwin's Origin of Species (1859)
  Successful because:
  (1) attracted people from alternates, (2) open-ended to have unsolved problems
  For example study and extension of Polemic astronomy, Newtonian optics,...
  Shared paradigms:  committed to same rules and standards.

Paradigm transformationS:
  Light: particle(Newton) to wave(Young/Fresnel) to particle (Plank/Einstein)
  Before 1700, no transformations only competing paradigms; books directed to
  other schools not to nature - similar to art schools...

Initially has as may electricity paradigms as electrician experimenters.
Fact gathering facilitated with technology (crafts) was random.

Only statics, dynamics, and geometrical optics had first paradigms WO theory.

Paradigm based research is highly directed; for example electricity being fluid;
but articles were directed to other electricians not to the educated public.

Factual scientific investigations:
  1. Validate via improved accuracy or special equipment
  2. Compare facts with predictions
  3. articulate and resolve ambiguities; find gravitational constant
Since Galileo laws guessed via paradigm before experiments could prove them.

Using theories for useful predictions is hack work for engineers/technicians.

Euler Lagrange Laplace Gauss improved match of Newtons theory and observations.
New paradigm triggered important theoretical work.

Paradigm articulation problems solved theoretically and experimentally.

Normal science: work under paradigm via: 1. determine significant fact
                2. match fact with theory 3. articulate theory

Scientist is a puzzle solver; normal science is puzzle solving; metaphor source:
    commitment to: concepts, theories, instruments, methods

Pre-paradigm: deep debates about methods, problems... to define schools not to
              reach agreement.  (Before Newton)

Paradigm can function without agreement on rationalization;
quantum mechanics may be a different paradigm for different groups;
He is molecule/atom to chemist/physicist; (kinetic theory / molecular spectra).

Discovery starts by find anomaly (paradigm violation) - typically not one act.
Lavoisier: oxygen is atomic principle of acidity and is formed when it unites
           with caloric (matter of heat).
Cannot say exactly who/when discovered oxygen - discoveries take time.

Discovery thru accident: x-rays;  Rontgen and Lavoisier noticed an anomaly and
continued investigation.  Others only noticed.

X-ray discovery was a shock, Leyden jar expected given electric fluid paradigm.

Card identify experiment mixed anomalous cards black hearts, red spades. With
increase exposure 90% identified them, 10% never did and were frustrated.
Similar with scientists...

Simultaneous discoveries illustrate traditions and how they prepare for change.

Right before Copernicus, astronomers knew the failures of Ptolemaic theory.
Similar with Lovoisier, phlogiston theory was in trouble.

Leibniz criticized Newton's absolute space, this forgotten until Einstein.
Wave theory of light (1915) forced the dragged ether hypothesis.

Novel theory emerges at a response to crisis; Aristarchus heliocentric
suggestion not in a crisis - it could not have been taken seriously;
Copernicus proposal was not simpler or more accurate.
Retooling (new theories) are reserved only for crisis.

A theory is declared invalid only if there is a substitute
Crisis loosens the rules of puzzle solving and new paradigm emerges.

Copernicus saw counterinstances where Ptolemics saw puzzles.
Failure to find solution discredits scientist not the theory; "it is a poor
carpenter who blames his tools"

Science students accept theories because of teachers and text - not because
of evidence - theoretical applications are for learning only.

No one questioned Newton's theory because of Mercury orbit anomalies.
The long time spent to solve Ptolemaic anomalies created the crisis.
Crisis/frustration; Pauli: "physics is confused... I rather be a comedian..."

Crisis resolutions: 1. find solution  2. put aside  3. fight for a new paradigm

Paradigm shift is not like visual gestalt (not even particle/wave?)
During crisis, do random experiments or philosophical analysis; examine paradigm
rules and assumptions via thought experiments; Newtonian, quantum, relativistic.

Most paradigm shifts involved young men - freer of rules of current paradigm.

Scientific revolution: paradigm replacement; malfunction to crisis to revolution.

Political revolution: old/new institutions polarization; political recourse
failure; recourse to mass persuasion and force.

Each party use only their paradigm to argue; paradigm choice not only by logic
and experiment.

Phenomena: 1. already explained; new paradigm not accepted  2. articulate with
old paradigm (most research) 3. cannot use current paradigm -> new paradigm

New theory has to have predictions different than old one.

New theory destroys old one. Energy conservation destroyed the caloric theory.

Similar to Copernicus/Ptolemy, Einstein theory accepted only if Newton was wrong.
Today this is not the majority view because:
  1. Newtonian still used by engineers and physicists
  2. Newtonian is approximation of relativity for speeds less than c

Newtonian is scientific theory supported by evidence, but its high velocities
claims were never parts of science and they were debunked by relativity.

If theory binds only to existing applications there can be no anomalies, crisis
... hallmarks of extraordinary science.

Relativity for c<<c is not Newtonian; different concepts of mass, time...

Newtonian theory, approximation of relativity, has utility but no science.

New paradigms redefine science
noncompatitable and incommensurable with the old.

"Stone fell because its nature drove to center of universe" recognized as
tautology and rejected right before Newton. Appearances dependent on size,
motion or corpuscular base matter became common.
Corpuscular paradigm bread new problems and their solutions -> Newton's laws.

Gravity, as innate attraction, was an occult quality - it hindered science.
"innate quality" different form of "tendency to fall".  Search for
mechanical explanation of gravity was hottest problem for Newton.
"Innate attraction" slowly accepted as irreducible property of matter.
No substantive difference between paradigms;
Forces being innate helped with electric and chemical affinity theories.

Maxwell's light theory gave no account of medium and was rejected.
His insistence of ether looked electric like lip service but was not.  Eventually
became OK to speak of displacement without saying what was displaced.
Problem of ether gave rise to relativity.

Space according quantum mechanics is not empty is more like ether.
Paradigm provides map and map-making for exploration.

Paradigm changes are (how to look at) world changes.  Unlike visual gestalt
perspective changes are permanent.
What one sees depends on what he has learned to see; without any training
one sees "a blomin'buzzing'confusion".

Hipparchus saw Uranus, but Herschel first saw it (1801) as a disc/planet.
Within 1850 20 asteroids were discovered.

Pendulum via Aristotle/Oresme was:  higher to lower position nature /impetus
theory; internal power implanted by projector.
Swinging stone was constrained fall/pendulum to Aristotle/Galileo.
Pendulum is not falling stone and oxygen not dephlogisticated air.

Aristotle saw stone impelled by its nature to fall and distance from an
instant to the end point, instead from initial to current point. Galiao saw stone
with impetus gained from starting point.  State versus process.

Via paradigms of race/culture/profession, have planets, pendulums, condensers...
Paradigms determine experience.

Affinity theory: 1. mixing producing heat, light... is chemical reaction
                 2. mixing producing particles is a physical mixture.
Solutions that did not separate (for example air) were compounds.
Dalton's (1803) law of multiple proportions (CO and CO2) was used in recipes
but solutions remained compounds.

Debate on whether chemical reactions are from fixed ratios was inconclusive.
Dalton was meteorologist and used different paradigm than chemists.

Dalton's was not just a law but new way of doing chemistry - Dalton said:
"new system of chemical philosophy".
Paradigm violation: copper oxides with 1:1.47 ratio instead of 1:2
(unlike CO, have 5 types; CU2O CuO CuO2..); accept theory and solve anomalies...

Revolutions are invisible.
Above examples seen as additions to science not as revolutions, because people
take images from textbooks that disguise their existence and importance.

1.Textbook / 2.popularization: technical details / everyday language descriptions
3.Philosophy of science: analysis of logical structure.
All 3 report the outcome, not the "how".

Textbook have short a history to show tradition which never existed.
History is rewritten constantly and becomes important only during a crisis.

Scientists deprecate history (making it linear) but highly value facts(!).
They remember science heroes but forget or revise their work.
Newton lied that Galileo found that gravity creates motion with time squared.

Textbooks imply scientists added a fact, theory... to the current knowledge.
But most additions are result new problems after revolutions.

Textbooks have Boyle's definition of element but he used it to argue againt the
theory of elements!  Element like time, energy, force... was never invented
or discovered.  Boyle and Lavoisier changed its meaning but did not invent the
notion or verbal definition.

Pedagogical science determines our (fictitious) image of the nature of science.

Theory verification: 1. probabalisicaly, but lack of neutral language/concepts
                        this disguise verification
                     2. falsification; but this may be only an anomaly; then
                        all theories would be rejected.

Proponents of different theories talk thru each other; their definitions and
list of problems are different.  Newton's dynamics first rejected; no
explaination of attractive force - this was forgetten until relativity.

Relativity redefined space, time,,, Copernicus redefined earth motion...

Competing pardigm are incommensurable.  Opposing scientists go thru paradigm
shift to be able to communicate.  Transition is not logic or one step at a time.
It''s all or nothing.  Few converts to Copernicus iwithin 100 years. Newton's
theory not accepted for 50 years.  Kelvin never accepted electromagnetic theory.
Plank: "new theory triumphs after its oppents die"

Paradign conversion is experience conversion; not proof based; not forcible.

Nost effective persuasion of paradigm is the problem solved. Copenicus calendar,
Newto celestial/terrestial motions, Lavosier gas-identity & weigtht relations,
Einstein ecectromagnics and motion.  Plank's radiation and Bohr's atom adopted
- had more problems than solved.
Asthetics play a role; general relativity.

Unlike engineer, doctor, theologian, scientist does not consider urgency, always
regard tools used to solve probelms, and address only their peers.
Thus science advances at a faster rate.

In music, literature, history, social science on always has competing and
incommensurable soultions.  Textbooks are secondary role.

Science: textbooks and latest published articles - no need to read Newton.
Rigid, higly effective, but unresponsive to crisis.  Young or outsiders respond.

Solving problems (progress), defined by paradigm, is faster than in other fields.

All civilizations have art, tchnology, religion...  only helenistic descendants
had rudimentary science.  Most science is European and in last 400 years.

Rule of science: 1. Prohibit appeals to politicians or masses.
                 2. Appleas only to competent group

Revolutions increase specialization and reduce communication.
Probems solved and accurary always increases.

Problem of Darwinism was not "man descendent from apes" - it was abolishing
the teleologiocal (purposal) evolution.
Pre-Darwin, God's creation and rule of evolution fopr continued improvement.
Origin of Species had no goals of God or nature.
Only environment and organisms were responsible for change.
Competion for survival producing man was most disturbing.

Analogy of evolution of oranisms and science:  selection by conflict guided
science revolutions, there was no goal or seeking of ultimate truth.

1. What is about man/nature that makes science possible? (old and unsolved)
2. Why does science reach firm concesus but other fields do not?
3. Why should paradign change produce a more perfect instrument?

Proof-type conceptions that explain sciencific growth are evolutionary-like.

Paradigm: 1. shared beliefs, values, techniques (socialogical)
          2. examplary rule to solve puzzles






















