“The Big Questions in Science: The Quest to Solve the Great Unknowns” 2014

1 What is the universe made of?
   dark matter, 1933, is invisible glue, binding galaxies and galaxy clusters.
   dark energy, 1998, is increasing the universe’s expansion.


2 How did life begin?
   Four billion years ago molecules started replicating themselves;
   “primordial soup” in hot pools near volcanoes, or meteorites hitting the sea.

3 Are we alone in the universe?
   1977 a signal bearing the potential hallmarks of an alien message was heard.
   We are scanning exoplanet atmospheres for oxygen and water.

4 What makes us human?
   Human genome is 99%/50% identical to a chimpanzee’s/banana’s.
   Three times as many neurons as a gorilla (86 billion).
   Other animals use language, tool-use, & recognition in the mirror.
   Cooperation and skills are most unique.

5 What is consciousness?
   Which bits of the brain and how the neural circuitry works?
   Artificial intelligence and attempts to build a brain neuron by neuron may help.

6 Why do we dream?
   Third of our lives is sleeping.
   Memory, learning and emotions?

7 Why is there stuff?
   Big bang created matter/antimatter counterpart, destroying
   them both to create energy.  Why bias for matter?

8 Are there other universes?
   Cosmology and quantum physics: infinite number of universes in a “multiverse”?.

9 Where do we put all the carbon?
   In old oil/gas fields? At the bottom of the sea?
   Protect forests and peat bogs, make energy without carbon.

10 How do we get more energy from the sun?
    Photo voltaic. Split water into oxygen, and hydrogen.
    Nuclear fusion.

13 What’s so weird about prime numbers?
    Public key encryption (internet security) uses prime numbers.
    Is the Riemann hypothesis (prime numbers have a distribution) correct?

14 How do we beat bacteria?
    Antibiotics enabled surgery, transplants and chemotherapy.
    25,000 people die each year of multi-drug-resistant bacteria.
    Over prescription and misuse; 80% used to boost animal growth.
    DNA sequencing --> antibiotics production (not by bacteria)
    Transplant “good” fecal bacteria. Discover new deep ocean bacteria.

15 Can computers keep getting faster?
    Make a computer with graphene or quantum computing?

16 Will we ever cure cancer?
    No - cancer is a living thing — ever-evolving to survive.
    Up to half of all cancers — 3.7 million a year — are preventable; quit smoking,
    drink/eat moderately, stay active, and avoid exposure to the midday sun.

17 When can I have a robot butler?
    Specialized robots: serve drinks, carry suitcases, prepare Amazon orders,
                 milk cows, sort email, and ferry you between airport terminals.
    True “intelligent” robot requires artificial intelligence breakthrough.
    Robotic aides caring for Japanese elderly by 2025

18 What’s at the bottom of the ocean?
    Ninety-five percent of the ocean is unexplored.
    From barreleye fish, with its transparent head, to a potential Alzheimer’s drug.

19 What’s at the bottom of a black hole?
    Black hole created by a dying, massive star, forms an infinitely
    small, infinitely dense point - a singularity.
    M-Theory might explain them?

20 How do we solve the population problem?
    7.6 billion; by 2050 at least 9 billion.
    Mars or building apartment blocks underground?
    Lab-grown meat? start taking sci-fi solutions seriously.

Fantasy:
  Can we live forever?
    DNA damage, balance of aging, metabolism and reproductive fitness,
    the genes that regulate aging -- treat aging; treat diabetes and cancer.

  Is time travel possible?
    At higher altitudes (lower gravity) time slows down.
    May travel into the future with high speeds.
    Not to past, although some have concocted wormholes and spaceships....

