https://www.editage.com/insights/7-major-problems-science-is-facing-a-survey-overview

1. Financial crunch
   Short term grants (2 yrs)  --> short-term projects; no complex questions;
     make institutions happy
     --> increasing published papers of low quality and research impact.

2. Poor study design in published papers
   Poorly designed studies; statistical flaws goes undetected.
   Breakthroughs valued most  -->
      researchers: 1. hype results to get published
                   2. focus on particular data & manipulate designs to make results attractive
   Biomedical “p-hacking”: report only those hypotheses that end in statistically significant results.
   Published results are inincentivized; significant & waste of money and resources.

3. Lack of replication studies
   Most scientists; “crisis of reproducibility” is real. Inherent problems in studies also hinder replication, such as
   inadequate data and complicated study design hinder replication .
   Science stakeholders skeptical about doing replication studies.
   Journals, researchers, & founders prefer original/groundbreaking results not replication(lack novelty).
   Results of most experiments never validated.

4. Peer review
   Peer reviewers weed out bad research & eliminate obvious flaws.
   Not incentivized --> reviewers delay work or provide unhelpful reviews.
   Reviewer bullying: authors forced to conduct additional experiments,
       cite certain papers, make unnecessary changes, and so on.
   Mostly single-blind peer review --> biases and professional jealousy
   Excessive dependence on the peer review --> peer review scams by authors, editors
   Questioned by many academics.

5. Research accessibility
   Trend for signing open data mandates and making data sharing mandatory.
   But many big publishers that operate their journals on subscription-based models.
   Problem of increasing subscription fees especially in developing countries.
     --> unauthorized access (Sci-Hub) to almost all paywalled papers.

6. Adequate and accurate science communication
   Communication gap between the scientific and the non-scientific community
     --> miscommunication, divided opinions, and lack of informed decision-making
   Researchers responsible; no time/inclination.
     --> media dependence, likely to misconstrue facts.
   Competitive nature of research --> poor communication of research
   Attention grabbing by researchers, universities, and journals by hyping results
     or promoting only positive results.
   Researchers should communicate accurate science to the public;
     public decides how their tax money is invested.

7. Stressful nature of academic/postdoc life
   Postdoc's: life is grueling,
     drive academic research and face fierce competition, low income, and low job security,
     numbers are increasing faster than permanent positions,
   PhD programs fail to train postdocs to find a non-academic job,
     --> postdocs struggle to advance their career.

